---
title: Tagged Unions
---

# Tagged Unions

Tagged unions, also known as sum types are structured data containing one of multiple different types storing sufficient metadata
that its current type, called a variant, is determinable at runtime. Generally, this is generated by the compiler with an internal
struct containing two fields: the variant union, and a sufficiently-sized tag value to hold its current state, thus the term "tagged
union".

They are declared in the language via the "enum union" declaration type, chosen as the type contains both an enumerated variant tag and
a union payload. An example declaration is as follows:

```cpp
enum union shape {
    circle :: f64,
    rectangle :: struct { f64 width; f64 height; };
    point
};

// While the language makes no guarantee to the exact memory configuration
// the above type is approximately equivalent in layout to:
struct shape {
    union {
        f64 circle;
        struct { f64 width; f64 height; } rectangle;
        void point;
    } variant;
    u8 tag;
};
```

Instances of these types can be created as follows:

```cpp
shape c = shape::circle(2.5f);
shape r = shape::rectangle({ .width = 5f, .height = 10f });
shape p = shape::point();
```

Given a value of type 'shape', one may not directly access any of the declared fields above. Accessing an inner variant requires determination
that a value is of that given variant. This may be done in a few ways:

# The 'is' Operator

The simplest method to determine if a tagged union is of a given variant is via the 'is' operator. Given some value `val` of type `T`, the expression `val is T::variant(inner)` returns a boolean value denoting the outcome of the comparison and binds name `inner` to a variable pointing to the payload region of the tagged union with the type according to `T::variant`. Note that this is unconditional, meaning the returned boolean can be discarded and the binding `inner` can be used regardless of whether the comparison succeeds, however use of the binding `inner` after the `is` statement evaluates to false is undefined behavior. The most idiomatic way to prevent this from happening is to use the `is` operator in an if statement.

```cpp
float get_rectangle_area(shape& s) {
    if (s is shape::rectangle(r)) {
        return r.width * r.height;
    } 

    return -1;
}
```

# 'match' Expressions

Match expressions, due to their stricter scoping rules, are capable of creating variable binds, and thus can be used when comparing a tagged union value to multiple variants at once. Patterns for tagged unions currently only support matching at the top-level, with an optional binding name for the internally held variant. Due to the conditional nature of each match block, this operation will always be safe if used on a validly formed value.

```cpp
float get_area(shape& s) {
    match (s) {
        shape::circle(c) => return c.r * 3.14;
        shape::rectangle(r) => return r.width * r.height;
        shape::point() => return 0;
    }
}
```
